BBK Electronics Corporation is a Chinese multinational conglomerate. The company specializes in developing consumer electronics products such as smartphones, tablet computers, smartwatches, smart TVs, Hi-Fi equipment, Blu- ray players, and digital cameras. It is one of the world's largest smartphone manufacturers. Its headquarters are in Futian District, Shenzhen, and it also has an office in Kwai Chung, Hong Kong. ==History== Guangdong BBK Electronics Corporation limited was established on 18 September 1995, in Dongguan, Guangdong, China. Duan Yongping founded the company, but began "spinning off the company's divisions into individual entities in 1999." BBK Electronics Corporation is the parent company of Oppo, Vivo, and Realme. Oppo's subsidiaries include OnePlus. Vivo's subsidiaries include iQOO (a former sub- brand of Vivo). It also markets Blu-ray players, headphones, headphone amplifiers and smartwatches under Oppo Digital brand. In March 2019, BBK Electronics announced imoo as its newest member and also a performance sub- brand. BBK Electronics' headquarters and production base are located in Chang'an, Dongguan. It is the biggest taxpayer in Chang'an. In Q1 2017, BBK Electronics shipped 56.7 million smartphones, surpassing both Huawei and Apple to become the 2nd largest smartphone manufacturer in the world, just behind Samsung. In 2020, the BBK series represented by Oppo announced its involvement in independent research and development of chips. Vivo also followed up to manufacture chips, mainly in cooperation with MediaTek. As of October 2022, BBK Electronics' Chinese-market website redirects to its subsidiary, Guangdong Little Genius Limited Technology Corporation, a manufacturer of smartwatches marketed for children. ==Notes== ==References== ==External links== *BBK Electronics Category:Companies based in Dongguan Category:Electronics companies established in 1995 Category:Chinese companies established in 1995 Category:Electronics companies of China Category:Mobile phone companies of China Category:Home appliance manufacturers of China Category:Mobile phone manufacturers Category:Chinese brands Category:Privately held companies of China Category:1995 establishments in China Category:Manufacturing companies of China Category:Telecommunications equipment vendors Category:Telecommunication equipment companies of China Category:Multinational companies headquartered in China