Brandon Scott Sessoms, best known as B. Scott (born March 21, 1981 in Franklin, Virginia) is an American television personality, radio show host and internet celebrity who is known for their YouTube videoblogs and their website, LoveBScott.com.Woods, Meghan E. (March 5, 2007) Daily Tar Heel UNC alum becomes Internet celebrity They are also a contributing editor to The Glam Network, and an Ebony Magazine advice columnist.B. Scott, Host Of BET Awards Pre-Show, Allegedly Told To Remove Makeup, Heels By Network (UPDATE) Scott, who is transgender non-binary, has become a popular internet personality through their video blogging and their website.Broadway, Donna (August 10, 2009) The Baltimore Times The Man Behind the Media Empire Scott has interviewed celebrities such as Mariah Carey, Ne-Yo, Chaka Khan, Aubrey O'Day and Ashanti. They have appeared in the mainstream media, making appearances on The Tyra Banks Show"Queerty: Wherein B. Scott Goes On Tyra To Tell New Yorkers They Dress Like Crap" and shows on Oxygen and BET. "B. Scott Joins Hair Battle Spectacular as a Guest Judge" ==Early life== Scott was born in Franklin, Virginia, and was raised in Hertford County, North Carolina, by parents of African-American, Irish, Jewish and Meherrin ancestry. As a teenager, Scott was selected to attend the North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics (NCSSM), a two-year public residential high school for students with a strong aptitude and interest in mathematics and science, located in Durham, North Carolina. After graduating from NCSSM in 1999, they attended University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, came out as gay in their sophomore year.My Coming Out Story by B. Scott They said in a video blog that they had feelings and were questioning previously but when they were a sophomore pre-med, they got their first romantic kiss from a man and realized they were attracted to men, and that they were using the intense pre-med education to distract themself from their sexuality. They stopped efforts to become a physician from the realization that it was a self-created distraction. Scott graduated in 2002 with a B.A. in Psychology. Scott moved to Washington, DC where they briefly practiced as a licensed realtor in the Capitol Hill area. In June 2005, Scott moved to Los Angeles, California where they continued their work in real estate and as an interior designer. It was during this time that they began their interest in the entertainment industry, while briefly working in print ads as a fashion model. ==Video blogging and LoveBScott.com== On January 1, 2007, Scott launched LoveBScott.com which primarily focuses on five pillars in pop culture: celebrity news, fashion, music, nightlife, and miscellaneous entertainment. The intent is to approach entertainment and celebrity news with a positive spin. The name lovebscott.com was selected in an effort to give their website a readily-identifiable personality with the mission of conveying a positive outlook.Ochalla, Bryan (October 20, 2009) The Advocate Don't Call Him The Next RuPaul In May 2007, B. Scott started incorporating YouTube videos into their website to personally connect with readers. The videos include personal observations, celebrity news, musical performances, political commentary, interviews and messages of encouragement to the audience. The videos are produced out of their Los Angeles residence. Their YouTube channel has over 90,000 subscribers, and has won numerous awards for viewership and subscriptions. Scott has won the Best Video Blog by The Black Weblog Awards"Best Video Blog" in 2007 and 2008. In January 2008 Scott became a YouTube company partner. In 2009, they created The B. Scott Show, a talk/variety-style internet show that ran concurrent to the original videoblog. Interview subjects included celebrities and important figures in the LGBT community. Interviews are conducted in Scott's home and broadcast on both the YouTube channel and the website. Celebrities interviewed have included Ne-Yo, Ashanti, Eva Marcille, LeToya Luckett of Destiny's Child, Mariah Carey, Jordin Sparks, and Chilli (of TLC). Scott's YouTube channel has led to recognition from numerous celebrities. Popular blogger Perez Hilton in 2007 named Scott his "Favorite New YouTuber". In addition, on June 19, 2009, Academy Award winner Jamie Foxx declared on his Sirius Satellite Radio channel "The Foxxhole", "I love B. Scott. [They're] very attractive. [They look] like a cross between Prince, Rosario Dawson and Lenny Kravitz." This unsolicited acclaim helped open B. Scott to a new level of recognition.Arceneaux, Michael (August 27, 2009) The Root Loving Gender Bending Internet Personality B. Scott ==Radio== In April 2010, they premiered The B. Scott Show on Jamie Foxx's channel, The Foxxhole, on Sirius XM Satellite Radio. The premiere guest was former Destiny's Child member, Michelle Williams.All Radio News The show was broadcast on Monday nights at 9PM ET on Sirius 106 and XM 149.B. Scott It was announced via Twitter that Scott would be discontinuing the radio show for personal reasons. ==Television== In 2010, Scott appeared on The Tyra Banks Show as part of the "Ambush Stranger Makeovers segment" and Oxygen (TV channel)'s Hair Battle Spectacular as a guest judge. Prior to these appearances, Scott was a featured contributor to Extra. Scott was also featured in "Too Hot to Handle," a 2013 season 2 episode of Chef Roblé & Co. on Bravo. ===2013 BET Awards: 106 & Park Pre-Show controversy=== In 2013 Scott served as a red carpet correspondent for Style Stage at the 2013 BET Awards: 106 & Park Pre-Show.B. Scott Files Multi-Million Dollar Gender Identity Discrimination Lawsuit against BET and Viacom (Court Documents + Personal Statement) They were aired live at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles on June 30. Prior to the awards show itself Black Entertainment Television (BET) aired a pre-show with Scott as the sole style correspondent.Leaked Emails Support B. Scott's Claims of BET Discrimination They were to have at least 12 one-on-one interview segments scheduled but only completed the first one, and were pulled from the stage in the middle of the second.Breaking Binaries With B. Scott: The TV, radio, and Web personality opens up about the BET Awards they were pulled from for dressing too femme, and explains how they came to terms with his recently claimed transgender identity. Scott, who regularly shares personal and public experiences with their fans, went public with allegations that after the first segment of the show they were pulled backstage and forced "to pull my hair back, asked me to take off my makeup, made me change my clothes and prevented me from wearing a heel."B. Scott, Gender-Nonconforming Host, Sues BET After Being 'Forced' To Wear Men's ClothesBET ‘Regrets’ B. Scott ‘Miscommunication’: ‘We Embrace All Gender Expressions’ The outfit had been pre-approved, but they were told it was unacceptable. Scott acquiesced changing into men's clothes but was never put back on air, instead being replaced by singer Adrienne Bailon. BET issued a statement that it was a matter of miscommunication and they regret any offense.GLAAD speaks with B. Scott and BET regarding BET Awards incident, network issues statement Scott dubbed the BET statement as a non-apology."BET's non-apology statement has added more insult to injury. It was not a 'miscommunication' and what they did to me was intentional." In August 2013 Scott sued BET and parent company Viacom for discrimination on the basis of gender identity, gender expression, and sexual orientation. They sought $2.5 million in damages. In January 2014 TMZ acquired and released internal emails showing BET executives had corresponded with each other before the show that they did not want Scott looking like a woman.BET: We Don't Want Male Host B. Scott Looking Like a Girl 1/9/2014BET Emails About Host B. Scott Suggest Network Didn't Want Him 'Looking Like A Woman' Network Vice President Rhonda Cowen wrote back that she would "speak to [them] about being less 'womanly.'" After the show another BET executive, Monica Ware, wrote, "Unless we can make public the reason we didn't want [them] dressed the way [they] normally [do], I would stay away from suits, suit selections, etc." Huffington Post also received copies of the emails and confirmed TMZ's reporting. In April 2014 BET won the lawsuit when Los Angeles Superior Court judge Yvette Palazuelos determined that BET's rights to control its creative expression through managing the attire of on- screen talent was protected by the First Amendment, and ultimately trumped the discomfort and discrimination Scott alleged suffering as a result of being forced to change into more traditionally masculine attire. Scott appealed and reached a settlement of an undisclosed amount with BET in February, 2015. In March 2021, BET announced that Scott will produce and host a new show on their network, Twenties The After Show. Scott stated "I am proud to make history as the first trans non-binary person to host and executive produce a show at BET," and "I am in a place of forgiveness and I am honored to help turn the page on the past and be a part of the network's move toward a more inclusive future for everyone." ==Podcast== In 2015, Scott launched 'The B. Scott Show' podcast as a successor to their YouTube series of the same name. According to the show's description, "B. Scott, the ‘Queen of Tea,' serves up the hottest tea in pop culture with lovebscott.com's editor Denver Sean, signature one-on- one interviews and ‘Ask B. Scott' advice." ==Other appearances== Since March 2007, Scott has been hired as a celebrity talent; contributing to several publicationsHoney Ask B. Scott and hosting events. On June 7, 2007, Scott hosted the "White Party" at the Hollywood Black Film Festival in Los Angeles. They also hosted this event in Summer 2008. On April 4, 2008, Scott kicked off gay Pride month at Yale University. Chen, Sophia (April 7, 2008) Yale Daily News B. Scott: Ostracized, Pressured, Inspired During the festivities they were at the forefront of three events. Scott hosted a Master's Tea at Yale University's Silliman College, a "Pride Meet and Greet" at Bespoke Restaurant and "After-party" at the Center Street Lounge in New Haven, CT. On October 19, 2008, Scott led a team for the AIDS Walk Los Angeles and hosted the official AIDS Walk Los Angeles afterparty at Eleven Restaurant & Nightclub in West Hollywood. CA. On February 28, 2009, Scott attended the 14th Annual Black Solidarity Conference at Yale University as a featured panelists on the "Disrobed: An Exposé of Black Sexuality" panel.Domingue, Michelle T. (March 13, 2009) Dartmouth Free Press Black Sexuality: Overcoming Homophobia In early 2010, following their interview with Mariah Carey, Scott appeared in their video for "Up Out My Face" featuring Nicki Minaj.Carey, Mariah-Up Out My Face In March 2010, Scott was the featured panelist for the first "Out in the Spotlight" panel discussion at Morehouse College. This appearance, hosted by Morehouse's Safe Space LGBT Organization, was the college's first step at creating a bridge to the LGBT community.HBCUdigest.com Bossip.com == Personal life == In March 2021, Scott stated "I am a trans non-binary person and I use they/them pronouns. My gender identity, who I am on the inside, doesn't fit the binary labels of 'man' or 'woman'." ==Awards== In 2014 Scott was included as part of the Advocate's annual "40 under 40" list. In 2016, Scott was included in OUT Magazine's OUT 100. The publication wrote, "Multimedia maven and androsexual B. Scott has come into his own in the past year, his cross- platform presence stronger than ever. At the 2013 BET Awards, he was instructed to dress more gender-normative, then plucked from his red-carpet- covering post. It was a slap in the face for the gender-nonconforming pop culture blogger, who was wearing a tunic, heels, and full makeup. But in 2015, he emerged from the subsequent discrimination lawsuit on a higher plane, with his own successful celebrity news and entertainment website, video opportunities, and an undisclosed settlement sum in the bank. Says Scott, 'I am triumphing.'" ==References== ==External links== * * * Category:1981 births Category:Living people Category:People from Franklin, Virginia Category:University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni Category:American gossip columnists Category:Transgender non-binary people Category:People from Hertford County, North Carolina Category:LGBT African Americans Category:African-American radio personalities Category:American bloggers Category:African-American bloggers Category:American infotainers Category:LGBT people from North Carolina Category:LGBT people from Virginia Category:North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics alumni Category:Journalists from Virginia Category:21st-century American non-fiction writers Category:21st- century African-American writers Category:20th-century African-American people Category:21st-century American LGBT people