The BBC Sports Unsung Hero Award is an award given annually as part of the BBC Sports Personality of the Year ceremony each December. The award is given to the sportsperson who has made a substantive yet unrecognised contribution to sport. Sportspeople are nominated by the public, and must be aged 16 years or over on 1 January that year. Nominees may not put themselves forward or be nominated by a member of their immediate family. A nominee must actively help others participate in a sport at any level on a voluntary basis. The work they do must not be part of their job or take part within their places of work, and they must not be a participant in the sporting group they are helping. Previous winners of the award are ineligible for nomination. One winner is selected from each of the twelve BBC English Regions, and the three national regions: BBC Scotland, BBC Wales, and BBC Northern Ireland. A judging panel then chooses the Unsung Hero winner from the fifteen regional winners. The inaugural winner in 2003 was 63-year-old Nobby Woodcock, for "his unstinting work with grassroots football in Wales". Of the fourteen recipients to date, four were chosen for their contributions to football; the other recipients contributed towards boxing, basketball, athletics, swimming, and the Special Olympics. Three of the fourteen winners have each been put forward from the BBC East Midlands and BBC South regions, and two from the BBC East region. The other winners came from the BBC London, BBC North West, BBC Northern Ireland, BBC Scotland, BBC West Midlands and BBC Wales regions. The most recent award was presented in 2022 to Mike Alden. == Winners == === By year === BBC Sports Unsung Hero Award winners Year Nationality Winner Location BBC Region Sport Rationale Note 2003 BBC Wales Football for "his unstinting work with grassroots football in Wales". 2004 BBC London Football for his work with Bethwin Football Club, a club he founded and funded personally. 2005 Isle of Wight BBC South Swimming for more than 25 years work in administration and coaching at the West Wight Swimming Club. 2006 BBC West Midlands Special Olympics for spending nearly 30 years organising Special Olympics for thousands of people with learning difficulties in North Shropshire. 2007 BBC South Football for over 40 years of work with Bardwell FC, a community football team that she founded in 1964. 2008 BBC South Boxing for setting up three boxing clubs, and campaigning for a permanent home for the Dorchester Amateur Boxing Club. 2009 BBC East Swimming for teaching "over 13,000 people to swim in the town over the last 35 years". 2010 Bedfordshire BBC East Basketball for providing children of differing abilities coaching in basketball. 2011 Scotland BBC Scotland Athletics for providing coaching to disabled athletes. 2012 Leicester BBC East Midlands Various for transforming a derelict Leicestershire sports ground into a popular community facility for tennis, squash, association football, bowls and dance. 2013 Joe & Maggie Forber Manchester BBC North West Basketball recognised regionally for their hard work at the Amaechi Basketball Centre in Whalley Range. 2014 Jill Stidever Hinckley, Leicestershire BBC East Midlands Swimming for nearly 60 years' work helping children with special needs learn to swim. 2015 Damien Lindsay Belfast BBC Northern Ireland Football 2016 Marcellus Baz Nottingham BBC East Midlands Boxing for providing free boxing classes to hundreds of young people at his boxing school. 2017 Denise Larrad Hinckley and Bosworth, Leicester BBC East Midlands Various for helping the elderly get involved in sport and leading running groups encouraging people of all ages to get active. 2018 Kirsty Ewen Inverness BBC Scotland Swimming overcame mental health issues to inspire others to do the same and find a better place through swimming. 2019 Keiren Thompson Bulwell, Nottingham BBC East Midlands Various 2020 Sgt. Matt Ratana East Grinstead, West Sussex BBC South East Rugby led a resurgence in popularity at the East Grinstead Rugby Club after becoming head coach. Awarded posthumously. 2021 Sam Barlow Hull BBC Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Various founded a fitness club for those experiencing loss after losing her husband to cancer. 2022 Mike Alden Bristol BBC West Football founded Park Knowle FC in one of Bristol's most deprived areas, open to players of all ages and ability. === By region === This table lists the total number of awards won by the BBC Region through which the recipient qualified for the award. Winners by region Nationality Number of wins BBC East Midlands 6 BBC South 3 BBC East 2 BBC Scotland 2 BBC London 1 BBC North West 1 BBC Northern Ireland 1 BBC South East 1 BBC Wales 1 BBC West Midlands 1 BBC Yorkshire and Lincolnshire 1 === By sport === This table lists the total number of awards won by the sport the recipient contributed towards. Winners by sport Sport of contribution Number of wins Football 4 Swimming 4 Basketball 3 Boxing 2 Athletics 1 Rugby 1 Special Olympics 1 Various 4 == References == General * Specific Unsung Hero Category:Awards established in 2003 Category:2003 establishments in the United Kingdom