The BBC gender pay gap controversy refers to a series of incidents in 2017 and 2018. ==Initial revelations== In July 2017, in response to a demand from the UK government as a condition of its new royal charter, the BBC published a list of all employees who earned more than £150,000.BBC pay: Male stars earn more than female talent, BBC News (19 July 2017). Of the 96 BBC employees making over this threshold, 62 were men and 34 were women, and of the seven highest earners, all were men.Amanda Proença Santos, BBC's List of Top-Paid Stars Sparks Controversy Over Pay Gap, Lack of Diversity, NBC News (19 July 2017). The disclosure prompted criticism of the BBC over the gender pay gap; other critics also criticised a lack of ethnic diversity among the highest- earning BBC personalities.Stewart Clarke, BBC Reveals Stars' Salaries Amid Controversy Over Pay for Women, Variety. Some commentators, however, argued that the mandatory disclosures were an effort by Theresa May's government to undermine the BBC.Steven Barnett, Unveiling BBC talent's pay is a deliberate attempt to undermine a great British institution, The Conversation (19 July 2017). ==Carrie Gracie resigns as China editor== Early in January 2018, it was announced that Carrie Gracie, the BBC's China editor, had resigned from the role because of the salary gender disparity. A pre-broadcast conversation between Today presenter John Humphrys and Jon Sopel, the BBC's North America editor, was leaked a few days later. Humphrys was recorded joking about the disparity. BBC management itself was said to be "deeply unimpressed" with Humphrys comments. Because of the BBC's impartiality rules, Woman's Hour presenter Jane Garvey, a prominent advocate of equal pay at the BBC, was unable to conduct an interview with Gracie on the programme, while You and Yours presenter Winifred Robinson was briefly taken off-air for tweeting her support for Gracie. More than a fortnight later, it was reported Conservative Culture minister Tracey Crouch, and other female MPs, have refused to be interviewed by Humphrys in response to his comments about Gracie's resignation. Although reported by Anushka Asthana, co-political editor of The Guardian, and other media sources, Crouch has not commented about the issue. ==Male presenters pay cut== It became known on 26 January 2018 that some of the BBC's leading male presenters would take a pay cut. According to the BBC's media editor Amol Rajan, Huw Edwards, John Humphrys, Nick Robinson, Jon Sopel and Jeremy Vine, have agreed to a salary reduction. Nicky Campbell, radio 5 live presenter, also told his listeners that he would be taking a pay cut. An independent audit investigating equal pay at the BBC is due shortly. ==Notes== ==References== Category:2017 controversies Category:2018 controversies Category:2017 in British television Category:2018 in British television Category:BBC controversies