The BBC Two '1991–2001' idents were broadcast from 16 February 1991 until 19 November 2001, and again from 9 July 2014 until 26 September 2018, on BBC Two in the United Kingdom. The idents, which consisted of a sans-serif '2' in Gill Sans, accompanied by the colour viridian, were created by branding agency Lambie-Nairn (and later, Red Bee Media), who also created the Channel 4 logo. The ident package was retained following the corporate rebrand of the BBC in October 1997 when a new logo and additional idents were introduced. The idents were taken out of service in November 2001, and were later revived on 21 June 2014 for "90s Night" and in July 2014, to commemorate the 50th birthday of BBC Two. They replaced the "Window on the World" idents and were broadcast until the evening of Wednesday 26 September 2018. ==Conception== The newly recruited BBC2 controller, Alan Yentob, noticed that the then-logo for the channel, which featured the word 'TWO' in red, green and blue within a white background and the 'O' being white, was affecting the reputation of BBC2. Surveys commissioned realised that most viewers thought the branding was "dull but worthy". He then decided to commission a worthy successor capable of displaying the personality of the channel, revealing his thoughts in the How Do They Do That? episode - about the idents. The idents were designed by the late branding expert Martin Lambie-Nairn, and first aired on the same day as the BBC1 virtual globe ident, also designed by Lambie-Nairn as part of a corporate rebrand of both channels. ==Idents== The idents featured a sans- serif '2' in a variety of different forms and environments usually accompanied by an element of the colour viridian and accompanied by a static corporate logo DOG below the '2'. Another DOG often used with the look was a small '888' legend in the top right of the screen. This meant that subtitles were available to accompany the programme on Ceefax page 888. Following the 1997 rebrand, the BBC logo was changed, with the word TWO added after the logo at the bottom of the screen. The '888' legend was also phased out in July 1999, to be replaced with 'Subtitles' following the uptake in digital television and the increased use of the new BBC Text service. A section of the TV programme How Do They Do That? that was broadcast on 15 February 1995 described how the graphics and sound of some of the idents were created. The clock idents had been changed through years and were mainly used for closedowns and news. The first clock ident was used in February until late 1991, the second was used in late 1991 until October 1997. The clock was edited in October 1997 with the new logo. This was the last BBC Two logo to use the clock ident. The new idents commissioned after 1997 placed less emphasis on the use of the colour viridian and the bell/harp music. Later on, as the Internet began to grow, the URL of BBC's website (www.bbc.co.uk) was included in idents on-screen from January 2000. On 27 September 2018, BBC Two received a rebrand, with the sans- serif '2' symbol being retired after 27 years; a new set of idents featuring a curve motif resembling a '2' were introduced. The last ident from this set, Optics, was aired one minute before the new set of idents were introduced. === Ident list === ==== 1991–1997 ==== Title Description Paint Paint featured a white polystyrene '2' on a black and white background, splashed by a blob of viridian paint which hurtles in horizontally from the right side of the screen. Water This ident featured an aqua-coloured '2' on a background of the same colour, half submerged in a pool of water at a 45-degree angle. Blade Blade featured a sharp, metal '2' falling into a viridian-coloured block and impaling it on its edge, standing and wobbling. Neon A '2' on a black background is depicted with seven viridian neon lights attached to it which flash in random sequences. Copper Cut-Out As the title suggests, it featured a copper cut-out of a '2' off of which sparks flew, as the figure glowed at its edges. Glass Featured a glass-cut '2' against a grey background, which reflected light in various directions. Silk This ident included a swathe of viridian silk drifting over the top of a '2' shape. Paper Cut-Out Paper Cut- Out featured a completely grey, paper-like foreground, with a '2'-shaped cut- out in the middle, revealing a partly cloudy sky behind it. Black & White Copper Cut-Out This ident was the black-and-white equivalent of the original Copper Cut Out with viridian sparks flying off the '2'. Shadow A cast shadow of a '2' rotates against a viridian wall. Water Reflection A variation on Water, the light was altered in such a way that it cast a reflection of the water line onto the top half of the '2'. Flowers Also known as Garden. A circular patch of grass in the middle sprouts several white flowers that form the shape of the '2'. Powder This featured a birds-eye view of the '2' falling onto a bed of white powder, revealing a layer of viridian powder beneath it, left streaked around the '2' as the stray particles clear away. Optic Also known as Optics. Optic included many optical fibres of mainly viridian and green colour, swaying from side to side, initially with great momentum but slowly and eventually settling into the shape of the '2' symbol. Car A viridian '2' with an aerial moves about on wheels in a yellow studio, in the same manner as a remote-controlled car. Jumping Dog Also known as Dog. This ident included a fluffy mint green '2' whirring, yapping and doing back flips in the manner of a toy mechanical dog on the same mint green table against the shaded-red background. Balloon Balloon featured a silver, helium-filled balloon in the shape of a '2' bobbing around gently in a fixed spot. Crystal Ball A crystal ball passes over an ethereal-looking surface, revealing a silhouette in the shape of a '2'. Firecracker This ident featured a viridian '2' on a rusty-looking brown desk, with live firecrackers attached to it, which then explode. Diary This ident featured a white '2' on a black background, with paper layers peeling off and drifting away. Steam Water droplets fall onto a viridian-coloured, metallic '2' of extremely hot temperature, turning into steam. ==== 1997–2001 ==== Title Description Aerial Aerial featured a dark green '2' with aerials attached to it in a red studio, appearing in random places between flashes of static, before finally appearing in the centre of the screen. Toy Ducks Also known as Duck. This ident depicted a soapy setting, from which a yellow '2' emerges and floats. Paint Pot In a parody of the original Paint ident, a silver paint pot is bombarded by lots of little viridian '2's, once again falling sideways. Zapper and Fly Also known simply as Zapper. This featured a fly running into a fly zapper in the shape of a '2' upon a wall. Gorilla There were three variations on this ident. A gorilla stands up a yellow '2' in one, knocks it over in the other and walks past it in the third. Swan Introduced at the start of 1998, it featured three grey '2's, resembling cygnets, swimming past a swan, which shakes its head shortly after. Dalek Black and white Daleks in the shape of '2's move through a grey corridor. Excalibur Excalibur featured a cerulean-blue '2' rising from a pool of water sideways. Catalyst Catalyst features a turquoise polystyrene '2' on a black and dark teal background, in this ident, a bunch of liquid droplets fly in from the top right corner of the screen and cause flames to flare up around the '2' on contact. Wave This featured a dark cyan '2' within a shaded-white background and a sheet of blue liquid that splashes around it throughout. Predator Predator begins centered on a '2'-shaped butterfly sitting within a jungle environment. The camera then zooms out, and the '2' is gobbled up by a larger green '2' in the form of a Venus flytrap. Kebab Kebab has a '2' made of meat roasting on a kebab spit, spinning around in flames. Woodpecker This ident depicted five metal poles, of varying distance, against an orange background, with '2's descending down the poles. Wave Night A variation on Wave. with a darker background and liquid pool, with a bright cyan '2'. Warp This ident depicted the '2' warping and twisting in a variety of ways. It ultimately went unused for being too abstract. ==References== ==External links== *BBC Two: 2015 Idents (whole set with video clips) *Ident Gallery Special Pres 2013 Category:BBC Two Category:BBC Idents Category:Television presentation in the United Kingdom